.TH "RTL_433" "1" "2019-08-21" "rtl_433" "rtl_433 Commands"
.ie \n(.g .ds Aq \(aq
.el       .ds Aq '
.ss \n[.ss] 0
.nh
.ad l
.de URL
\fI\\$2\fP <\\$1>\\$3
..
.als MTO URL
.if \n[.g] \{\
.  mso www.tmac
.  am URL
.    ad l
.  .
.  am MTO
.    ad l
.  .
.  LINKSTYLE blue R < >
.\}
.SH "NAME"
rtl_433 \- Generic RF data receiver and decoder for ISM band devices using RTL-SDR and SoapySDR.
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.sp
This manual page documents briefly the \fBrtl_433\fP command.
.sp
\fBrtl_433\fP is a generic data receiver, mainly for the 433.92 MHz, 868 MHz (SRD),
315 MHz, and 915 MHz ISM bands. It works with RTL\-SDR and/or SoapySDR. Activly tested
and supported are Realtek RTL2832 based DVB dongles (using RTL\-SDR) and LimeSDR
(LimeSDR USB and LimeSDR mini engineering samples kindly provided by MyriadRf),
PlutoSDR, HackRF One (using SoapySDR drivers), as well as SoapyRemote.
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.sp
\fBrtl_433\fP [\fIOPTION\fP]... \fIFILE\fP...
.SH "OPTIONS"
.sp
A summary of options is included below.
Detailed information on some options follows.
.\" body
.SS "General options"
.TP
[ \fB\-V\fI\fP ]
Output the version string and exit
.TP
[ \fB\-v\fI\fP ]
Increase verbosity (can be used multiple times).
       \-v : verbose, \-vv : verbose decoders, \-vvv : debug decoders, \-vvvv : trace decoding).
.TP
[ \fB\-c\fI <path>\fP ]
Read config options from a file
.SS "Tuner options"
.TP
[ \fB\-d\fI <RTL\-SDR USB device index> | :<RTL\-SDR USB device serial> | <SoapySDR device query> | rtl_tcp | help\fP ]
[\-g <gain> | help] (default: auto)
.TP
[ \fB\-t\fI <settings>\fP ]
apply a list of keyword=value settings for SoapySDR devices
       e.g. \-t "antenna=A,bandwidth=4.5M,rfnotch_ctrl=false"
.TP
[ \fB\-f\fI <frequency>\fP ]
Receive frequency(s) (default: 433920000 Hz)
.TP
[ \fB\-H\fI <seconds>\fP ]
Hop interval for polling of multiple frequencies (default: 600 seconds)
.TP
[ \fB\-p\fI <ppm_error\fP ]
Correct rtl\-sdr tuner frequency offset error (default: 0)
.TP
[ \fB\-s\fI <sample rate>\fP ]
Set sample rate (default: 250000 Hz)
.SS "Demodulator options"
.TP
[ \fB\-R\fI <device> | help\fP ]
Enable only the specified device decoding protocol (can be used multiple times)
       Specify a negative number to disable a device decoding protocol (can be used multiple times)
.TP
[ \fB\-G\fI\fP ]
Enable blacklisted device decoding protocols, for testing only.
.TP
[ \fB\-X\fI <spec> | help\fP ]
Add a general purpose decoder (prepend \-R 0 to disable all decoders)
.TP
[ \fB\-l\fI <level>\fP ]
Change detection level used to determine pulses (0\-16384) (0=auto) (default: 0)
.TP
[ \fB\-z\fI <value>\fP ]
Override short value in data decoder
.TP
[ \fB\-x\fI <value>\fP ]
Override long value in data decoder
.TP
[ \fB\-n\fI <value>\fP ]
Specify number of samples to take (each sample is 2 bytes: 1 each of I & Q)
.TP
[ \fB\-Y\fI auto | classic | minmax\fP ]
FSK pulse detector mode.
.SS "Analyze/Debug options"
.TP
[ \fB\-a\fI\fP ]
Analyze mode. Print a textual description of the signal.
.TP
[ \fB\-A\fI\fP ]
Pulse Analyzer. Enable pulse analysis and decode attempt.
       Disable all decoders with \-R 0 if you want analyzer output only.
.TP
[ \fB\-y\fI <code>\fP ]
Verify decoding of demodulated test data (e.g. "{25}fb2dd58") with enabled devices
.SS "File I/O options"
.TP
[ \fB\-S\fI none | all | unknown | known\fP ]
Signal auto save. Creates one file per signal.
       Note: Saves raw I/Q samples (uint8 pcm, 2 channel). Preferred mode for generating test files.
.TP
[ \fB\-r\fI <filename> | help\fP ]
Read data from input file instead of a receiver
.TP
[ \fB\-w\fI <filename> | help\fP ]
Save data stream to output file (a '\-' dumps samples to stdout)
.TP
[ \fB\-W\fI <filename> | help\fP ]
Save data stream to output file, overwrite existing file
.SS "Data output options"
.TP
[ \fB\-F\fI kv | json | csv | mqtt | influx | syslog | null | help\fP ]
Produce decoded output in given format.
       Append output to file with :<filename> (e.g. \-F csv:log.csv), defaults to stdout.
       Specify host/port for syslog with e.g. \-F syslog:127.0.0.1:1514
.TP
[ \fB\-M\fI time[:<options>] | protocol | level | stats | bits | help\fP ]
Add various meta data to each output.
.TP
[ \fB\-K\fI FILE | PATH | <tag>\fP ]
Add an expanded token or fixed tag to every output line.
.TP
[ \fB\-C\fI native | si | customary\fP ]
Convert units in decoded output.
.TP
[ \fB\-T\fI <seconds>\fP ]
Specify number of seconds to run, also 12:34 or 1h23m45s
.TP
[ \fB\-E\fI hop | quit\fP ]
Hop/Quit after outputting successful event(s)
.TP
[ \fB\-h\fI\fP ]
Output this usage help and exit
       Use \-d, \-g, \-R, \-X, \-F, \-M, \-r, \-w, or \-W without argument for more help
.SS "Supported device protocols"
.TP
[ \fB01\fI\fP ]
Silvercrest Remote Control
.TP
[ \fB02\fI\fP ]
Rubicson Temperature Sensor
.TP
[ \fB03\fI\fP ]
Prologue Temperature Sensor
.TP
[ \fB04\fI\fP ]
Waveman Switch Transmitter
.TP
[ \fB06\fI\fP ]
* ELV EM 1000
.TP
[ \fB07\fI\fP ]
* ELV WS 2000
.TP
[ \fB08\fI\fP ]
LaCrosse TX Temperature / Humidity Sensor
.TP
[ \fB10\fI\fP ]
* Acurite 896 Rain Gauge
.TP
[ \fB11\fI\fP ]
Acurite 609TXC Temperature and Humidity Sensor
.TP
[ \fB12\fI\fP ]
Oregon Scientific Weather Sensor
.TP
[ \fB13\fI\fP ]
* Mebus 433
.TP
[ \fB14\fI\fP ]
* Intertechno 433
.TP
[ \fB15\fI\fP ]
KlikAanKlikUit Wireless Switch
.TP
[ \fB16\fI\fP ]
AlectoV1 Weather Sensor (Alecto WS3500 WS4500 Ventus W155/W044 Oregon)
.TP
[ \fB17\fI\fP ]
Cardin S466\-TX2
.TP
[ \fB18\fI\fP ]
Fine Offset Electronics, WH2, WH5, Telldus Temperature/Humidity/Rain Sensor
.TP
[ \fB19\fI\fP ]
Nexus Temperature & Humidity Sensor
.TP
[ \fB20\fI\fP ]
Ambient Weather Temperature Sensor
.TP
[ \fB21\fI\fP ]
Calibeur RF\-104 Sensor
.TP
[ \fB22\fI\fP ]
* X10 RF
.TP
[ \fB23\fI\fP ]
DSC Security Contact
.TP
[ \fB24\fI\fP ]
* Brennenstuhl RCS 2044
.TP
[ \fB25\fI\fP ]
Globaltronics GT\-WT\-02 Sensor
.TP
[ \fB26\fI\fP ]
Danfoss CFR Thermostat
.TP
[ \fB29\fI\fP ]
Chuango Security Technology
.TP
[ \fB30\fI\fP ]
Generic Remote SC226x EV1527
.TP
[ \fB31\fI\fP ]
TFA\-Twin\-Plus\-30.3049, Conrad KW9010, Ea2 BL999
.TP
[ \fB32\fI\fP ]
Fine Offset Electronics WH1080/WH3080 Weather Station
.TP
[ \fB33\fI\fP ]
WT450, WT260H, WT405H
.TP
[ \fB34\fI\fP ]
LaCrosse WS\-2310 / WS\-3600 Weather Station
.TP
[ \fB35\fI\fP ]
Esperanza EWS
.TP
[ \fB36\fI\fP ]
Efergy e2 classic
.TP
[ \fB37\fI\fP ]
* Inovalley kw9015b, TFA Dostmann 30.3161 (Rain and temperature sensor)
.TP
[ \fB38\fI\fP ]
Generic temperature sensor 1
.TP
[ \fB39\fI\fP ]
WG\-PB12V1 Temperature Sensor
.TP
[ \fB40\fI\fP ]
Acurite 592TXR Temp/Humidity, 5n1 Weather Station, 6045 Lightning
.TP
[ \fB41\fI\fP ]
Acurite 986 Refrigerator / Freezer Thermometer
.TP
[ \fB42\fI\fP ]
HIDEKI TS04 Temperature, Humidity, Wind and Rain Sensor
.TP
[ \fB43\fI\fP ]
Watchman Sonic / Apollo Ultrasonic / Beckett Rocket oil tank monitor
.TP
[ \fB44\fI\fP ]
CurrentCost Current Sensor
.TP
[ \fB45\fI\fP ]
emonTx OpenEnergyMonitor
.TP
[ \fB46\fI\fP ]
HT680 Remote control
.TP
[ \fB47\fI\fP ]
Conrad S3318P Temperature & Humidity Sensor
.TP
[ \fB48\fI\fP ]
Akhan 100F14 remote keyless entry
.TP
[ \fB49\fI\fP ]
Quhwa
.TP
[ \fB50\fI\fP ]
OSv1 Temperature Sensor
.TP
[ \fB51\fI\fP ]
Proove / Nexa / KlikAanKlikUit Wireless Switch
.TP
[ \fB52\fI\fP ]
Bresser Thermo\-/Hygro\-Sensor 3CH
.TP
[ \fB53\fI\fP ]
Springfield Temperature and Soil Moisture
.TP
[ \fB54\fI\fP ]
Oregon Scientific SL109H Remote Thermal Hygro Sensor
.TP
[ \fB55\fI\fP ]
Acurite 606TX Temperature Sensor
.TP
[ \fB56\fI\fP ]
TFA pool temperature sensor
.TP
[ \fB57\fI\fP ]
Kedsum Temperature & Humidity Sensor, Pearl NC\-7415
.TP
[ \fB58\fI\fP ]
Blyss DC5\-UK\-WH
.TP
[ \fB59\fI\fP ]
Steelmate TPMS
.TP
[ \fB60\fI\fP ]
Schrader TPMS
.TP
[ \fB61\fI\fP ]
* LightwaveRF
.TP
[ \fB62\fI\fP ]
* Elro DB286A Doorbell
.TP
[ \fB63\fI\fP ]
Efergy Optical
.TP
[ \fB64\fI\fP ]
* Honda Car Key
.TP
[ \fB67\fI\fP ]
Radiohead ASK
.TP
[ \fB68\fI\fP ]
Kerui PIR / Contact Sensor
.TP
[ \fB69\fI\fP ]
Fine Offset WH1050 Weather Station
.TP
[ \fB70\fI\fP ]
Honeywell Door/Window Sensor, 2Gig DW10/DW11, RE208 repeater
.TP
[ \fB71\fI\fP ]
Maverick ET\-732/733 BBQ Sensor
.TP
[ \fB72\fI\fP ]
* RF\-tech
.TP
[ \fB73\fI\fP ]
LaCrosse TX141\-Bv2, TX141TH\-Bv2, TX141\-Bv3, TX141W sensor
.TP
[ \fB74\fI\fP ]
Acurite 00275rm,00276rm Temp/Humidity with optional probe
.TP
[ \fB75\fI\fP ]
LaCrosse TX35DTH\-IT, TFA Dostmann 30.3155 Temperature/Humidity sensor
.TP
[ \fB76\fI\fP ]
LaCrosse TX29IT Temperature sensor
.TP
[ \fB77\fI\fP ]
Vaillant calorMatic VRT340f Central Heating Control
.TP
[ \fB78\fI\fP ]
Fine Offset Electronics, WH25, WH32B, WH24, WH65B, HP1000 Temperature/Humidity/Pressure Sensor
.TP
[ \fB79\fI\fP ]
Fine Offset Electronics, WH0530 Temperature/Rain Sensor
.TP
[ \fB80\fI\fP ]
IBIS beacon
.TP
[ \fB81\fI\fP ]
Oil Ultrasonic STANDARD FSK
.TP
[ \fB82\fI\fP ]
Citroen TPMS
.TP
[ \fB83\fI\fP ]
Oil Ultrasonic STANDARD ASK
.TP
[ \fB84\fI\fP ]
Thermopro TP11 Thermometer
.TP
[ \fB85\fI\fP ]
Solight TE44
.TP
[ \fB86\fI\fP ]
Wireless Smoke and Heat Detector GS 558
.TP
[ \fB87\fI\fP ]
Generic wireless motion sensor
.TP
[ \fB88\fI\fP ]
Toyota TPMS
.TP
[ \fB89\fI\fP ]
Ford TPMS
.TP
[ \fB90\fI\fP ]
Renault TPMS
.TP
[ \fB91\fI\fP ]
inFactory
.TP
[ \fB92\fI\fP ]
FT\-004\-B Temperature Sensor
.TP
[ \fB93\fI\fP ]
Ford Car Key
.TP
[ \fB94\fI\fP ]
Philips outdoor temperature sensor (type AJ3650)
.TP
[ \fB95\fI\fP ]
Schrader TPMS EG53MA4, PA66GF35
.TP
[ \fB96\fI\fP ]
Nexa
.TP
[ \fB97\fI\fP ]
Thermopro TP08/TP12/TP20 thermometer
.TP
[ \fB98\fI\fP ]
GE Color Effects
.TP
[ \fB99\fI\fP ]
X10 Security
.TP
[ \fB100\fI\fP ]
Interlogix GE UTC Security Devices
.TP
[ \fB101\fI\fP ]
* Dish remote 6.3
.TP
[ \fB102\fI\fP ]
SimpliSafe Home Security System (May require disabling automatic gain for KeyPad decodes)
.TP
[ \fB103\fI\fP ]
Sensible Living Mini\-Plant Moisture Sensor
.TP
[ \fB104\fI\fP ]
Wireless M\-Bus, Mode C&T, 100kbps (\-f 868950000 \-s 1200000)
.TP
[ \fB105\fI\fP ]
* Wireless M\-Bus, Mode S, 32.768kbps (\-f 868300000 \-s 1000000)
.TP
[ \fB106\fI\fP ]
* Wireless M\-Bus, Mode R, 4.8kbps (\-f 868330000)
.TP
[ \fB107\fI\fP ]
* Wireless M\-Bus, Mode F, 2.4kbps
.TP
[ \fB108\fI\fP ]
Hyundai WS SENZOR Remote Temperature Sensor
.TP
[ \fB109\fI\fP ]
WT0124 Pool Thermometer
.TP
[ \fB110\fI\fP ]
PMV\-107J (Toyota) TPMS
.TP
[ \fB111\fI\fP ]
Emos TTX201 Temperature Sensor
.TP
[ \fB112\fI\fP ]
Ambient Weather TX\-8300 Temperature/Humidity Sensor
.TP
[ \fB113\fI\fP ]
Ambient Weather WH31E Thermo\-Hygrometer Sensor
.TP
[ \fB114\fI\fP ]
Maverick et73
.TP
[ \fB115\fI\fP ]
Honeywell ActivLink, Wireless Doorbell
.TP
[ \fB116\fI\fP ]
Honeywell ActivLink, Wireless Doorbell (FSK)
.TP
[ \fB117\fI\fP ]
* ESA1000 / ESA2000 Energy Monitor
.TP
[ \fB118\fI\fP ]
* Biltema rain gauge
.TP
[ \fB119\fI\fP ]
Bresser Weather Center 5\-in\-1
.TP
[ \fB120\fI\fP ]
* Digitech XC\-0324 temperature sensor
.TP
[ \fB121\fI\fP ]
Opus/Imagintronix XT300 Soil Moisture
.TP
[ \fB122\fI\fP ]
* FS20
.TP
[ \fB123\fI\fP ]
* Jansite TPMS Model TY02S
.TP
[ \fB124\fI\fP ]
LaCrosse/ELV/Conrad WS7000/WS2500 weather sensors
.TP
[ \fB125\fI\fP ]
TS\-FT002 Wireless Ultrasonic Tank Liquid Level Meter With Temperature Sensor
.TP
[ \fB126\fI\fP ]
Companion WTR001 Temperature Sensor
.TP
[ \fB127\fI\fP ]
Ecowitt Wireless Outdoor Thermometer WH53/WH0280/WH0281A
.TP
[ \fB128\fI\fP ]
DirecTV RC66RX Remote Control
.TP
[ \fB129\fI\fP ]
* Eurochron temperature and humidity sensor
.TP
[ \fB130\fI\fP ]
* IKEA Sparsnäs Energy Meter Monitor
.TP
[ \fB131\fI\fP ]
Microchip HCS200 KeeLoq Hopping Encoder based remotes
.TP
[ \fB132\fI\fP ]
TFA Dostmann 30.3196 T/H outdoor sensor
.TP
[ \fB133\fI\fP ]
Rubicson 48659 Thermometer
.TP
[ \fB134\fI\fP ]
Holman Industries iWeather WS5029 weather station (newer PCM)
.TP
[ \fB135\fI\fP ]
Philips outdoor temperature sensor (type AJ7010)
.TP
[ \fB136\fI\fP ]
ESIC EMT7110 power meter
.TP
[ \fB137\fI\fP ]
Globaltronics QUIGG GT\-TMBBQ\-05
.TP
[ \fB138\fI\fP ]
Globaltronics GT\-WT\-03 Sensor
.TP
[ \fB139\fI\fP ]
Norgo NGE101
.TP
[ \fB140\fI\fP ]
Elantra2012 TPMS
.TP
[ \fB141\fI\fP ]
Auriol HG02832, HG05124A\-DCF, Rubicson 48957 temperature/humidity sensor
.TP
[ \fB142\fI\fP ]
Fine Offset Electronics/ECOWITT WH51 Soil Moisture Sensor
.TP
[ \fB143\fI\fP ]
Holman Industries iWeather WS5029 weather station (older PWM)
.TP
[ \fB144\fI\fP ]
TBH weather sensor
.TP
[ \fB145\fI\fP ]
WS2032 weather station

* Disabled by default, use \-R n or \-G
.SS "Input device selection"
.RS
RTL\-SDR device driver is available.
.RE
.TP
[ \fB\-d\fI <RTL\-SDR USB device index>\fP ]
(default: 0)
.TP
[ \fB\-d\fI :<RTL\-SDR USB device serial (can be set with rtl_eeprom \-s)>\fP ]
.RS
To set gain for RTL\-SDR use \-g <gain> to set an overall gain in dB.
.RE
.RS
SoapySDR device driver is available.
.RE
.TP
[ \fB\-d\fI ""\fP ]
Open default SoapySDR device
.TP
[ \fB\-d\fI driver=rtlsdr\fP ]
Open e.g. specific SoapySDR device
.RS
To set gain for SoapySDR use \-g ELEM=val,ELEM=val,... e.g. \-g LNA=20,TIA=8,PGA=2 (for LimeSDR).
.RE
.TP
[ \fB\-d\fI rtl_tcp[:[//]host[:port]\fP ]
(default: localhost:1234)
.RS
Specify host/port to connect to with e.g. \-d rtl_tcp:127.0.0.1:1234
.RE
.SS "Gain option"
.TP
[ \fB\-g\fI <gain>\fP ]
(default: auto)
.RS
For RTL\-SDR: gain in dB ("0" is auto).
.RE
.RS
For SoapySDR: gain in dB for automatic distribution ("" is auto), or string of gain elements.
.RE
.RS
E.g. "LNA=20,TIA=8,PGA=2" for LimeSDR.
.RE
.SS "Flex decoder spec"
Use \-X <spec> to add a flexible general purpose decoder.

<spec> is "key=value[,key=value...]"
Common keys are:
.RS
name=<name> (or: n=<name>)
.RE
.RS
modulation=<modulation> (or: m=<modulation>)
.RE
.RS
short=<short> (or: s=<short>)
.RE
.RS
long=<long> (or: l=<long>)
.RE
.RS
sync=<sync> (or: y=<sync>)
.RE
.RS
reset=<reset> (or: r=<reset>)
.RE
.RS
gap=<gap> (or: g=<gap>)
.RE
.RS
tolerance=<tolerance> (or: t=<tolerance>)
.RE
where:
<name> can be any descriptive name tag you need in the output
<modulation> is one of:
.RS
OOK_MC_ZEROBIT :  Manchester Code with fixed leading zero bit
.RE
.RS
OOK_PCM :         Pulse Code Modulation (RZ or NRZ)
.RE
.RS
OOK_PPM :         Pulse Position Modulation
.RE
.RS
OOK_PWM :         Pulse Width Modulation
.RE
.RS
OOK_DMC :         Differential Manchester Code
.RE
.RS
OOK_PIWM_RAW :    Raw Pulse Interval and Width Modulation
.RE
.RS
OOK_PIWM_DC :     Differential Pulse Interval and Width Modulation
.RE
.RS
OOK_MC_OSV1 :     Manchester Code for OSv1 devices
.RE
.RS
FSK_PCM :         FSK Pulse Code Modulation
.RE
.RS
FSK_PWM :         FSK Pulse Width Modulation
.RE
.RS
FSK_MC_ZEROBIT :  Manchester Code with fixed leading zero bit
.RE
<short>, <long>, <sync> are nominal modulation timings in us,
<reset>, <gap>, <tolerance> are maximum modulation timings in us:
PCM     short: Nominal width of pulse [us]
         long: Nominal width of bit period [us]
PPM     short: Nominal width of '0' gap [us]
         long: Nominal width of '1' gap [us]
PWM     short: Nominal width of '1' pulse [us]
         long: Nominal width of '0' pulse [us]
         sync: Nominal width of sync pulse [us] (optional)
common    gap: Maximum gap size before new row of bits [us]
        reset: Maximum gap size before End Of Message [us]
    tolerance: Maximum pulse deviation [us] (optional).
Available options are:
.RS
bits=<n> : only match if at least one row has <n> bits
.RE
.RS
rows=<n> : only match if there are <n> rows
.RE
.RS
repeats=<n> : only match if some row is repeated <n> times
.RE
.RS
	use opt>=n to match at least <n> and opt<=n to match at most <n>
.RE
.RS
invert : invert all bits
.RE
.RS
reflect : reflect each byte (MSB first to MSB last)
.RE
.RS
match=<bits> : only match if the <bits> are found
.RE
.RS
preamble=<bits> : match and align at the <bits> preamble
.RE
.RS
	<bits> is a row spec of {<bit count>}<bits as hex number>
.RE
.RS
unique : suppress duplicate row output
.RE

.RS
countonly : suppress detailed row output
.RE

E.g. \-X "n=doorbell,m=OOK_PWM,s=400,l=800,r=7000,g=1000,match={24}0xa9878c,repeats>=3"
.SS "Output format option"
.TP
[ \fB\-F\fI kv|json|csv|mqtt|influx|syslog|null\fP ]
Produce decoded output in given format.
.RS
Without this option the default is KV output. Use "\-F null" to remove the default.
.RE
.RS
Append output to file with :<filename> (e.g. \-F csv:log.csv), defaults to stdout.
.RE
.RS
Specify MQTT server with e.g. \-F mqtt://localhost:1883
.RE
.RS
Add MQTT options with e.g. \-F "mqtt://host:1883,opt=arg"
.RE
.RS
MQTT options are: user=foo, pass=bar, retain[=0|1], <format>[=topic]
.RE
.RS
Supported MQTT formats: (default is all)
.RE
.RS
  events: posts JSON event data
.RE
.RS
  states: posts JSON state data
.RE
.RS
  devices: posts device and sensor info in nested topics
.RE
.RS
The topic string will expand keys like [/model]
.RE
.RS
E.g. \-F "mqtt://localhost:1883,user=USERNAME,pass=PASSWORD,retain=0,devices=rtl_433[/id]"
.RE
.RS
Specify InfluxDB 2.0 server with e.g. \-F "influx://localhost:9999/api/v2/write?org=<org>&bucket=<bucket>,token=<authtoken>"
.RE
.RS
Specify InfluxDB 1.x server with e.g. \-F "influx://localhost:8086/write?db=<db>&p=<password>&u=<user>"
.RE
.RS
  Additional parameter \-M time:unix:usec:utc for correct timestamps in InfluxDB recommended
.RE
.RS
Specify host/port for syslog with e.g. \-F syslog:127.0.0.1:1514
.RE
.SS "Meta information option"
.TP
[ \fB\-M\fI time[:<options>]|protocol|level|stats|bits|newmodel\fP ]
Add various metadata to every output line.
.RS
Use "time" to add current date and time meta data (preset for live inputs).
.RE
.RS
Use "time:rel" to add sample position meta data (preset for read\-file and stdin).
.RE
.RS
Use "time:unix" to show the seconds since unix epoch as time meta data.
.RE
.RS
Use "time:iso" to show the time with ISO\-8601 format (YYYY\-MM\-DD"T"hh:mm:ss).
.RE
.RS
Use "time:off" to remove time meta data.
.RE
.RS
Use "time:usec" to add microseconds to date time meta data.
.RE
.RS
Use "time:tz" to output time with timezone offset.
.RE
.RS
Use "time:utc" to output time in UTC.
.RE
.RS
	(this may also be accomplished by invocation with TZ environment variable set).
.RE
.RS
	"usec" and "utc" can be combined with other options, eg. "time:unix:utc:usec".
.RE
.RS
Use "protocol" / "noprotocol" to output the decoder protocol number meta data.
.RE
.RS
Use "level" to add Modulation, Frequency, RSSI, SNR, and Noise meta data.
.RE
.RS
Use "stats[:[<level>][:<interval>]]" to report statistics (default: 600 seconds).
.RE
.RS
  level 0: no report, 1: report successful devices, 2: report active devices, 3: report all
.RE
.RS
Use "bits" to add bit representation to code outputs (for debug).
.RE

Note:	Use "newmodel" to transition to new model keys. This will become the default someday.
.RS
A table of changes and discussion is at https://github.com/merbanan/rtl_433/pull/986.
.RE
.SS "Read file option"
.TP
[ \fB\-r\fI <filename>\fP ]
Read data from input file instead of a receiver
.RS
Parameters are detected from the full path, file name, and extension.
.RE

.RS
A center frequency is detected as (fractional) number suffixed with 'M',
.RE
.RS
 'Hz', 'kHz', 'MHz', or 'GHz'.
.RE

.RS
A sample rate is detected as (fractional) number suffixed with 'k',
.RE
.RS
 'sps', 'ksps', 'Msps', or 'Gsps'.
.RE

.RS
File content and format are detected as parameters, possible options are:
.RE
.RS
 'cu8', 'cs16', 'cf32' ('IQ' implied), and 'am.s16'.
.RE

.RS
Parameters must be separated by non\-alphanumeric chars and are case\-insensitive.
.RE
.RS
Overrides can be prefixed, separated by colon (':')
.RE

.RS
E.g. default detection by extension: path/filename.am.s16
.RE
.RS
forced overrides: am:s16:path/filename.ext
.RE

.RS
Reading from pipes also support format options.
.RE
.RS
E.g reading complex 32\-bit float: CU32:\-
.RE
.SS "Write file option"
.TP
[ \fB\-w\fI <filename>\fP ]
Save data stream to output file (a '\-' dumps samples to stdout)
.TP
[ \fB\-W\fI <filename>\fP ]
Save data stream to output file, overwrite existing file
.RS
Parameters are detected from the full path, file name, and extension.
.RE

.RS
File content and format are detected as parameters, possible options are:
.RE
.RS
 'cu8', 'cs16', 'cf32' ('IQ' implied),
.RE
.RS
 'am.s16', 'am.f32', 'fm.s16', 'fm.f32',
.RE
.RS
 'i.f32', 'q.f32', 'logic.u8', 'ook', and 'vcd'.
.RE

.RS
Parameters must be separated by non\-alphanumeric chars and are case\-insensitive.
.RE
.RS
Overrides can be prefixed, separated by colon (':')
.RE

.RS
E.g. default detection by extension: path/filename.am.s16
.RE
.RS
forced overrides: am:s16:path/filename.ext
.RE

.\" end
.SH "RESOURCES"
.sp
\fBProject web site:\fP \c
.URL "https://github.com/merbanan/rtl_433" "" ""
.SH "COPYING"
.sp
Copyright \(co 2012\-2019 Benjamin Larsson, Christian W. Zuckschwerdt, and many contributors.
.br
Free use of this software is granted under the terms of the GPL\-2+ License.
